---
layout: post
title: PHILOSOPHICAL SCRUTINY OF THE CONCEPT OF SELF

bigimg: /assets/img/self.jpg
tags: [Self, Philosophy, Philosophy Of Mind, True Self]
---

I will talk about personal Identity and how the Identity persists even after all the physical, mental, emotional, intellectual changes in the person. I am going to explain the two approaches to the concept of Self: Narrative and minimal Self. I will also mention the Hindu thought on the Self.

Over an extended period, philosophers have been struggling with the concern of personal Identity. Personal Identity is a philosophical concept which deals with questions such as: What am I? Do I remain the same from my birth to death? What is that essential property which makes me different from others even though I go through changes all the time? Is reincarnation real?

There are some theories given by different philosophers which prove that our Identity is neither associated with our body or our memory. There is a theory known as ‘Body theory,’ which says that personal Identity is endured over time because a person remains in the same body for his/her entire life. But there were plenty of objections to this theory. Our body undergoes continuous change over the period of time, we are no longer the same as we were born. Each and every cell of our body is replaced hundreds of times. If our body itself is no longer the same, then how can our Identity persist over time? We can understand this by a standard example. If one exchanges all the mental content (beliefs, memories, personalities) with another person, then definitely both persons are not going to be the same any longer.

David Hume believed that the Self is inseparable. In his view, a person’s thoughts, feelings, beliefs, activities change all the time. Though they are not continued, they have succeeding existence. Hume says that “the self consists of a bundle of momentary impressions that are strung together by the imagination.” Even if a body part of a person is damaged or amputated, the person doesn’t stop being the same person he/she was before.

In 1689, John Locke Locke said that ‘it is the same consciousness that makes a man be himself to himself’. The conclusion of his argument was the personal Identity not be defined by the resemblance of immaterial substances (material things). Still, it should instead be defined in terms of equivalence of consciousness. Locke relates memory to consciousness and tells that Identity retains over time because of our memory or chain of mind and thoughts. This theory is known as ‘Memory theory.’ We may not remember every little thing that has happened exactly. Still, we do remember the time we first recognize that thing. In this way, the memories are connected to each other(previous one). These connections in the memories lead to the persistence of personal identity. He claimed that a person A at a time is the same person as person B at an earlier time only insofar as A is conscious of B’s experiences.

This theory also had some objections. If a person commits a mistake unconsciously and does not remember committing that mistake, is it fair to call that person a culprit? According to this theory, if someone is suffering from a disease such as amnesia, that person cannot persist his/her Identity. This tells that we do not need to keep our promises if we do not remember making them. We cannot blame the person for his deeds if he claims he has no memory of that incident. Hence I think it is not a valid theory for the persistence of personal identity.

Hence I think it is not a valid theory for the persistence of personal identity. To overcome these confusions we can make some ground rules on the basis of which we can claim if the personal Identity has persisted or not. We can take the example of ‘the ship of Theseus.’ Theseus went on a long voyage, in the time of journey his ship required a lot of replacement.he has tossed overboard used sails, spars, rigging, planks, and replaced them all. Some people collected the parts of ships he threw away after replacement and made a new ship using those used parts. In this case, we cannot decide which ship is the original ship. But if there is a law which says that the boat must be registered each year to count as a previous ship and the ship must contain at least 60% material used while making the ship for the first time. So we now can say none of the above ships in the original ship.

There are two approaches to the concept of Self: Narrative Self and minimal Self. Narrative Self includes memories, experiences from the past as well as predictions and intentions of your future. Narrative Self tells us more about experiences and memories and not about our current psychological and physical state. But if we neglect the memories and future intentions of the Self, what remains is the minimal Self, unextended in time. Minimal Self is the consciousness of a person, how one experiences something without consideration of past and future. Further minimal Self has two significant aspects: self-ownership and self-agency. Self-ownership is the sense of owning body, mind, and soul, no one has the right to do anything to you without your consent. Self-agency is the sense that my actions and responses are autogenic. These two concepts are overlapping in many scenarios From this, I concluded that self-agency is generated by self-ownership.

In Hindu thought traces, the Self is defined by various Sanskrit terms. Its slightly different concept of Self, which is from the Vedas(books were consisting of knowledge from ancient Indian time). Vedic literature consists of four Vedas: Rg Veda, Atharva Veda, Yajur Veda, Saam Veda. There are many terms used to denote the individual Self in Hindu thought. Some of them are ‘jiva,’ which means life, Atman, which means inner Self or soul, Jivatman, etc. In Hindu philosophy, the Self is explained in a spiritual way. It says humans must acquire self-knowledge, which is ‘Atma Gyan,’ to attain moksha(liberation) after death.

To sum up the whole discussion, in my opinion, every philosopher or even every individual may have a different view on personal Identity. We cannot argue whether this theory explains the persistence of Identity. Every theory also has many faults or objections. Self is beyond someone’s identification. Our minimal Self is the best approach to the concept of Self as it doesn’t include memories from the past. It is something that we feel, how we act irrespective of our memory of the past. This approach overcomes the objections of body and memory theory. Narrative Self requires validation of memory theory.

## References

1. Blackburn, S. (1999). Think: A compelling introduction to philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
2. [Mind:Personal Identity](https://youtu.be/lcIqoN9oRgo)
3. [Personal Identity: Crashcourse](https://youtu.be/trqDnLNRuSc)
4. [Raid on Memory and Personal Identity](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/reid-memory-identity/)
5. [Indian Theories](https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/self-indian-theories-of/v-1/sections/vedic-literature)
6. [The lockean memory theory of personal identity](http://www.inquiriesjournal.com/articles/1683/the-lockean-memory-theory-of-personal-identity-definition-objection-response)
6. [Self-Knowledge](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/self-knowledge/index.html)
